Kayla Nicole used AI in her public apology?

Live Events

What did Kayla Nicole write?



as a Reliable and Trusted News Source Addas a Reliable and Trusted News Source Add Now!

(You can now subscribe to our

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel

Kayla Nicole, former longtime girlfriend of Kansas City Chiefs star Travis Kelce, is once again in the headline and is receiving backlash for an apology post. The controversy surrounding Kayla Nicole is not just about what she said years ago but also how she chose to respond to it. Nicole owed up to her past after a user on X resurfaced screenshots of her alleged past bigoted posts she issued an apology on Instagram.What started with old tweets being shared again has now grown into a wider debate about honesty, responsibility, and whether people are using artificial intelligence to write public apologies. According to The SportsRush, some users online accused Kayla Nicole of using ChatGPT or another AI tool to write her apology for her past offensive tweets. This has created a second controversy, as people are now questioning if her apology was sincere or generated by a machine.The controversy started when netizens dug up tweets Nicole posted between 2010 and 2014, long before she became a public figure. The posts included racial comments, homophobic terms, and stereotypes about Asian and Indian communities. As screenshots spread quickly on social media, Nicole deleted her X account and later responded on Instagram. In her statement, she said she was "ashamed" of her past language and added that her current beliefs "are rooted in love, respect, and empathy."Many users copied her message and used AI-generated tools to check if Nicole's public apology was written using AI. Some users copied her message into online AI-detection tools, which labeled it as “100% AI-generated.” According to The SportsRush, this result encouraged critics to argue that Nicole relied on ChatGPT to form her apology.While some people thought that the possibility of using AI in her public apology indicates that Kayla Nicole was not guilty, others pushed back. Others said AI accusations felt like an unnecessary distraction and argued that using detection tools to delegitimize her apology only added noise to an already tense situation.“I want to take a moment to sincerely apologize for the hurtful tweets I posted so many years ago,” Kayla wrote in a Nov. 13 Instagram Story. “Seeing them resurface last week has been incredibly difficult, and reading them now, I’m ashamed that I ever thought or spoke that way. They were ignorant, hurtful and completely wrong.”She went on to emphasize that she “would never use those words or express those kinds of views,” particularly through her own experiences facing online harassment.“I’ve seen firsthand how cruel and harmful online hate can be, and I would never want to add to that world of pain in any form,” she continued. “I take full responsibility to what I posted and I’m truly sorry to anyone I may have hurt.”And while the former sports journalist admitted she cannot change her past actions, she is hoping to move forward by spreading love. “My heart, values and perspective are completely rooted in empathy, love and respect for others,” she explained. “I will continue showing my actions who I’ve become and what I stand for today.”“I would be lying if I said that that level of hate and just online chaos doesn’t impact me,” she admitted during an episode of Unapologetically Angel last year. “You could go to my most recent post and it’ll be people debating why I’m worthless and how I’ll never be a talented person.”As she put it, “I think there’s something about that level of fame that attracts crazy people and it’s unfortunate because I’ve never done anything to warrant that kind of backlash.”