Delhi’s air quality index (AQI) showed no improvement on Saturday, with the city recording an average AQI of 386, in the ‘Very Poor’ category – nearly identical to Friday’s reading of 387 — CPCB data shows. This comes after three consecutive days of ‘Severe’ air earlier in the week, when the AQI had remained above 400. The Capital also recorded the season’s lowest minimum temperature on Saturday at 9.7 degrees Celsius.

As per Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM) forecast, the AQI is likely to remain in the ‘Very Poor’ category on November 16 and slip into the ‘Severe’ category between November 17 and 18. ‘Severe’ to ‘Very Poor’ conditions would likely prevail thereafter.

According to India Meteorological Department (IMD), westerly winds with speeds up to 12 kmph prevailed over Delhi, aiding in the transportation of smoke from farm fires in neighbouring states.

Story continues below this ad

The Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI) reported 1,119 stubble burning events across six states on November 15 – 39 in Punjab, 13 in Haryana, 160 in Uttar Pradesh, none in Delhi, 125 in Rajasthan and 782 in Madhya Pradesh. Between September 15 and November 15, 17,143farm fires were detected across these states.

While the Decision Support System by IITM had not been updated, its forecast estimated a 14.55% contribution from farm fires on Sunday, with emissions from the transport sector expected to be dominant at around 17%.

Meanwhile, the city recorded its lowest minimum temperature of the season so far on Saturday, with the night temperature settling at 9.7 degrees Celsius, 3.8 notches below normal, according to IMD. The maximum stood at 26.6 degrees Celsius, 1.9 notches below normal. Foggy conditions are expected over the next six days, it added.

Through the season, stubble burning, emissions from transport and local pollution sources, along with unfavourable weather conditions, have continued to keep pollution levels elevated. When ventilation is low – the air near the surface is unable to rise and disperse pollutants – emissions tend to accumulate.

Story continues below this ad

Calm winds, lower temperatures and a shallow mixing layer all reduce this natural ventilation, allowing pollutants to remain trapped close to the ground and leading to a rapid build-up of smog.

According to experts, Delhi’s baseline emissions are already high due to dust and industrial pollution, among others.

As part of reviewing the city’s dust mitigation efforts and cleanliness drive, Environment Minister Manjinder Singh Sirsa visited Vasant Kunj and Mahipalpur on Saturday. He said similar measures were underway at 62 identified dust- or traffic-prone hotspots to curb particulate matter contributing to smog.